You can't get the pictures on
the tape. This is an interview with Geraldine Ann
Johnson, maiden name Hart, by Tracy L. Swope on 4
December in Temple concerning the Vietnam War. In
the interest of accumulating knowledge about the
war, I'm going to donate this tape to the Texas A&M
Oral History Collection and the University
Archives. Is this all right with you? Yes, this is
all right with me.
My first question is, can you please give us some
background on your life, and why did you join the
service? I'm the eldest of eight children of a
Marine Corps officer for 29 years, and I grew up at
places like El Toro and Cherry Point, and I
graduated from high school in 1961. My father was
the kind of person that people were in those days
and as far as he was concerned as an Irish Catholic I
had three possible futures as the eldest of eight
children and a daughter I could go into the convent
I could become a teacher or I could become a nurse at
the time I had some degree of flair for languages
and I had studied two languages in high school and
was very taken with the glamour and romance of the
Foreign Service and had been accepted to the
Georgetown School of Foreign Affairs and, of
course, had no money to go. And nobody was giving
scholarship money to 16-year-old girls in those
days. I had not turned 17 when I graduated. So a
friend of mine who had always wanted to be a nurse
all her life, her dad was a Navy captain, was going
to go to Georgetown University to a nursing
school. And she had the catalog. And lo and behold,
it said that if you were a registered nurse and
worked in our hospital, you got six free semester
hours a semester. Well, I allowed it to happen. As
young as I was, I could piss away three years in a
nursing school somewhere and become an RN and then
go to Georgetown and work my way through the School
of Foreign Affairs. So that was my plan. And I went
off to Maryview Hospital in Portsmouth,
Virginia, which ran a diploma school of nursing,
to embark on this plan.
It was during that period of time, from 62 through
65, that all the events that kicked Vietnam loose
as a war for our country transpired. I vividly
remember being a student nursing, coming back to
the dormitory on the break, and the television was
on, and President Johnson was talking about the
Tonkin Bay, or Gulf incident, and when they had
fired on our ships. Well, about midway through my
junior year, I got interested in the scholarship
plans. And at that point in time, the Navy Nurse
Corps was only taking students from college
programs. And the Army and the Air Force were
taking students from both college and diploma
programs. And so I had focused in on the Air Force
and the Army. And to be quite honest, the Army
recruiter was doing his job. He was personable. He
was interested. He followed up on us. and he just
pursued us hotly there were about six of us in my
class that he was convinced would be wonderful
nurse corps officers as a matter of fact he
succeeded in recruiting four of us and we signed up
for the army student nurse program which in those
days they swore you in as a pfc in the women's army
reserve and you were on active duty as a student
nurse you made 99.37 a month now until that time my
father had dutifully sent me a 25 check every month
as my allowance and I bought everything I needed
with $25 a month that wasn't provided by my school,
which was room, board, uniforms, books, pretty
much everything provided. But I mean, soap
powder, makeup, all that stuff, I was on a $25 a
month allowance, and I thought I had got rich.
$99.37 a month was just, you know, your major
increase in status. And so my senior year was quite
comfy. I just did anything I felt like doing. I
guess I had lived on a beer budget so long that I
didn't really have much taste for champagne, and I
just had a marvelous time. And indeed, when I
graduated, I was committed to join the Army Nurse
Corps for two years. In fact, I was in the Army. If I
didn't pass state boards, I was going to get to be an
enlisted medic. And of course, in those days,
people passed state boards. There wasn't any if to
it. The schools taught to the boys. But anyway, I
was put out on leave to entertain myself until my
state board results came back. And I went to work at
George Washington University Hospital. Dad had
three consecutive tours that they lived in the
same house for. He was at the Navy Annex, and then he
was at Henderson. No, then he was at the Chief of
Naval Operations Office, and then he was at
Henderson Hall. and so they were three PCS tours
but they lived in the same house six blocks from
Fort Myer North Gate in Arlington, Virginia
during that whole period of time that I was going
through nurses training and for many years
thereafter it was a nine-year stint there.
Consequently my four youngest sisters and
brothers grew up in that house and have a totally
different idea of what life is like than the four
older of us who grew up moving around on air bases.
Anyway, my state boards came through and in
sometime in the middle of August in 65 I reported to
Fort Sam Houston, Texas where I went through basic
at the medical field service school and for a
little girl who was 19 who had just been in a convent
school of nursing for three years it was really
quite quite an experience not exactly
academically challenging and I had just never
seen so much steak beer and cute guys in my life and I
had a wonderful time and it's a good thing it didn't
last longer than nine weeks because I don't think
my metabolism could have kept up and At that point
in time it was, you know, full bore. They ran the
school where they had so many companies of doctors
and a company of medical service corps officers
and two companies of nurses and, you know, that
kind of thing. We were all there for nine weeks at
the same time and then every nine weeks they just
turned it over and cleared the barracks out and ran
in another bunch. And everybody had orders to stay
inside places. And everybody knew that within a
year, they were probably going to start rotating
overseas one place or another. At the time, I had
put on my dream sheet that I wanted to go to Nancy,
France, which was the last US Army hospital in
France. But it was during my senior year, after I
turned in my dream sheet, that France quit NATO and
they closed that hospital. So I wasn't going to
France. But most of my friends were angling to go to
Europe one way or another. I got stamped with 50 of
my classmates to Walter Reed in Washington, D.C.,
right back where I came from. Never been so damn
disgusted in my life. And what had happened is that
they had mobilized one of the, I forget what they
called them in those days, Strack Unit hospitals,
you know what they called them? And it was a
warehouse ghost hospital nothing but supplies
and a couple of sergeants to count them and they had
stripped all the big hospitals in the states of
active duty personnel to staff this thing and had
shipped it over to Vietnam and they shipped 50 of us
into Walter Reed all on the same reporting day to
replace these people and we were put on duty that
day and Walter Reed at that point in time had been
running without these people for about two weeks
Everybody was on six-day weeks, and they were on
12-hour days. And I worked on 12-hour days and
six-day weeks for the three months that I was at
good old Walter Reed. We suddenly realized that
the 50 of us they had sent there were all nurses, and
three of the nurses were guys. And we were now back
where everybody was married, majors, and
colonels. And it was really very unsociable, and
it was very expensive. And lieutenants in
Washington, DC just it's not a survival mode and I
was bleeding on my father's shoulder about how I
certainly did not join the army to putter my time
away at Walter Reed for heaven's sakes it was just
awful and he said well honey what you need to do is
you need to put on your greens make an appointment
make an appointment that's important to see the
chief nurse march in report to her desk and request
orders for Vietnam I said, okay, so I went back and I
called the nice sergeant who was her desk
personage and told him that I wanted an
appointment with Colonel Barrett and I still
remember her name. And he gave me one at 8 o'clock on
Monday morning the following Monday and I put my
greens on and marched smartly into her office and
snapped two in front of her desk and Lieutenant
Hart reporting, ma'am, and I would like to request
reassignment to Vietnam. and she looked at me and
she said you're not ready to go to Vietnam
lieutenant because you can't even get your
uniform on right you don't have your bars on yes
ma'am I'll fix that so I went back and I called my dad
in tears and he said honey yeah you live and learn
she said call back and make an appointment for next
Monday at eight o'clock I had five consecutive
Monday morning eight o'clock appointments with
Colonel Barrett And each time it got to be a game,
okay, Lieutenant, you've been here. Thank you,
ma'am. Dismissed. Out the other face, and out I go.
Every morning. The ward I was on was Ward 36, and it
was 40 beds, and six of them up front were what are
now ICU beds. They were mainly the close to the
nurse's station beds in those days. And all but
five of the patients on that ward, and it was full
all the time. had come from the Yodrang Valley
Battle, and they were all from the 1st Air Cav. And
average age, discounting the other five
patients, was probably all of 23 or 24. And they
all, it was a general surgery and plastic surgery
floor. So I had a lot of the guys with avulsion
wounds who were awaiting granulation healing so
that they could go in for complex plastic surgery
techniques. And had one kid, Sergeant Starr, who
had been shot in the canteen. And if you think about
physics and metal canteens, what happens when you
have a fluid under pressure? That canteen
exploded like a grenade and blew half his hip off.
Fortunately, it didn't involve any major
arteries, major veins, major nerves, and it
actually left most of the bone intact. It just blew
away all the flesh. And so he had this big, great,
massive mess that was healing him. And I vividly
remember that they decided he was He was good
enough to go home for Christmas on the 24th of
December, and he came running into the ward
panicky. He had gotten his issue of clothes from
the quartermaster, and the pants were unhemmed,
and his bus left in an hour and a half. And I sat down
and hemmed his pants. I mean, what else can you do?
It's hard to tell young student nurses nowadays
that you could hem somebody's pants and not feel in
the least bit subservient. in today this does not
not outrage my women's lib blood at all because
that ward was a buddy ship Colonel Barrett
probably had been harassed by somebody but for
some reason she sent out a big memo to all the wards
that the televisions were by regulation to be off
at 10 p.m. and we were to enforce that well my guys
laid in bed all day most of them were in pretty good
condition health-wise except their wounds
permitted them or prevented them from being just
bored to death and it was a big great hall with 20
beds down one side and 20 beds down the other and you
know they had the two TVs one at one end of the ward
one at the other and you know it was about all they
had and the late movies were really pretty
entertaining so I marched out I was the night nurse
marched out and said gentlemen I make rounds once
an hour when I make rounds I'm very noisy so you know
I'm coming when I'm making rounds I'm enforcing
the prohibition about the televisions is that
clear yes ma'am yes ma'am yes ma'am so you know 11
o'clock I'd slam the door in the medicine cupboard
and clutter around and knock my flashlight on
something and hear as the TVs went off everybody's
just breathing quietly go back in you hear the TVs
come right back on you know I never saw television
being on and they took good care of me and I took good
care of them one day they were it didn't take long
they knew I was the Marine Colonel's daughter and
they also knew that I had been naive enough to apply
for airborne training while I was in basic and I got
the news broken to me that the army wasn't really an
equal opportunity employer and that I couldn't go
to airborne school and So they allowed us how they
were going to teach me themselves. So I crawled up
on his chair, and they were going to teach me how to
do a parachute landing, and about eight or nine of
them in their beds coaching me about how I'm
supposed to fall off his chair properly. And this
little bald man in a white lab coat kind of came
shambling by, and he didn't really say anything,
but he looked pretty benign, and he kept trying on
going, and You know, I figured if he wanted
something, he'd have stopped me, and it was the
next day when I saw the picture in front of the
dining hall that said he was the commander of
Walter Reed Army Medical Center, General
Mallory, Malloy, Mallory, something like that.
Anyway, we were buddies, and it worked out pretty
well. Anyway, after my visits, Colonel Barrett
had known Sergeant General Heaton when he was...
She was a lieutenant nurse and he was a captain
doctor, I think. And she managed to get me shipped
out ahead of regulations. And I got my orders to
report at Travis Air Force Base in California on
the, I want to say it was the 4th of January. Anyway,
I took a week's leave and... bummed hops out there.
It took me about three days to get there. About a
fairly zigzag route, but it didn't cost much. And I
had a wonderful time. I was a hop bummer. I really
enjoyed that. Just went anywhere I wanted to as
long as there was an airplane with a seat going
there. And stayed in the Marine Memorial Hotel on
Sutter Street that my father reckoned I'd be safe
in. And spent two or three days just shopping and
sleeping late and puttering around and Then met
three of my friends from Basic who also had managed
to get out of the places they'd been sent to,
wonderful places like Fort Polk, Louisiana.
Really tells you something when youngsters like
us would rather go to war than be stuck in some of
these holes. Anyway, one fun thing that happened
that you may appreciate is that while I was
dragging my duffel bag through the main hall of the
big MAC terminal at Travis, This little airman,
first class, comes running out, now I'm a
Butterbark lieutenant here, and asked me if he can
help me with my bag. And I smiled and said, no, I'm
doing fine. Rusty, what are you doing here? It was
one of our football heroes from when I was in high
school, another Marine colonel's kid. And he was
very impressed with the fact that I was an officer.
So at any rate, got on the plane and 26 hours later
got off of it. This has got to be the longest plane
ride I've ever experienced.
Do you feel the Army prepared you to go to Vietnam?
Did you receive any training? Oh yeah, yeah. In
basic, we had a class advisor who we thought of as
being as old as Noah's wife, and her name was Major
Betts. and I have found a picture of Major Betts
around here somewhere. Anyway, here she is. Major
Betts kept throwing in salty reminders. She
taught all of the etiquette and courtesy and how to
wear your brass and how are things organized and
arranged and why is AR 670-4 important to you
because it's the AR that covers absolutely
everything that has to do with running hospitals
and you know she kept throwing in salty references
to what you should and should not do in combat she
had been a youngster in Korea and had pretty well
taken it on as her mission to get us sort of used to
the idea that we were going to do this thing and I do
run into her later in the story now Yeah, did they
prepare us completely? I don't think anybody
could have. Most of those people, their career
experiences weren't necessarily going to
duplicate what we were dealing with. They dealt
with a fluid front, but we dealt with no front at
all. And it made all sorts of things, like can you go
buy something in the village, different. But in
terms of an expectation of what to take with you and
what was life going to be like, It was reasonably
well done, if you listened. I had friends who
didn't.
Where did you end up? You relate to us your
experience of actually landing in Vietnam and
going to your unit. Well, that big plane landed,
and I had been very uncomfortably asleep with my
head on the shoulder of another nurse, a guy who'd
been in my basic class, who ended up on the same
flight. It turned out he was going to the same
hospital, so we kind of linked up. He's a older guy
who was married and had a couple kids and I had a bad
crick in my neck from trying to sleep like this
because we were packed in I'm sure four abreast in
those airplanes but it must have been three but
anyway it felt like four anyway uh Dave and I
stumbled off the thing and you know went over they
were running it pretty much like any other get off a
big airplane operation went over and got our
luggage and the next thing we know this wiry little
dried up colonel nurse and an enlisted driver are
standing there going you know, are you
lieutenants Hart and Ely? And we said, yes,
indeed. And she said, I'm Colonel Coffey, and I've
come to take you out to the third search. And we're
going to go by the third field and pick up a couple of
things on our way. So we went over. The third field
hospital was maybe all of six blocks away from
Thompson Air Base. And so we drove over there in
this cracker box ambulance and went in. And
somebody gave us a glass of soda, which I was a
little amused, not amused, but bemused at the time
because it didn't have any ice in it. It was cold. It
didn't have any ice in it. I thought, hmm, strange.
We didn't have potable ice is what it was. It was ice
with soda caps in it that were supposed to tell you
not to put it in anything because you couldn't
drink it. You could use it to chill down bottles and
cans. That's what I learned later. And ever since
then, I've been an ice-a-holic. I fill a glass
completely up with ice before I put beverage in it
after 18 months with no ice. But anyway, whatever
business she had to do, she did, and we rode on out
the 30 kilometers or so to the 173rd Space Camp,
which was where our hospital was, at Bien Hoa,
right off the air base, and chortled in there. And
she was wringing her hands when she was assigning
us our bunks and telling us that the artillery
across the street was going to start up their H&Is
about 8 p.m., and she really was sorry because it
was hard for anybody to sleep. And I rolled into my
bunk, and the next thing I knew, it was noon the next
day. I slept through the whole thing. That's when I
decided I probably, if they thought that was bad
stuff and hard to sleep through, that I was
probably going to do okay here. What year was this?
This was in 1966.
January, by that time, 6th, I think. Something
like that. Because you had to cross the date line in
the wrong direction to get out there. Anyway, I got
assigned to the post-op ward. The way the hospital
was organized, it had pre-op, which was our ER
shock trauma type thing, OR, post-op, and
holding. And to get on holding, you had to be
ambulatory and have no IVs. Post-op was everybody
else. OR, of course, was OR. And pre-op, at that
point in time, was an all-male operation, and only
male nurses worked in pre-op. And pre-op did
everything. They did the immunizations, and they
did blood banking. They drew blood when they
needed fresh blood. And, of course, when the
choppers landed, they stripped guys and started
IVs and, you know, worked with getting them ready
for surgery and that kind of thing. And it was
amazing. In some ways, it was very similar to
standard hospital nursing. In other ways, it was
very different. The charts only had three kinds of
forms on them. I thought that was wonderful. It had
doctor's orders, and it had nurse's notes, and it
had a sheet of stable lab slips, too. That's all.
And if it, you know, that's all there was. I think
there was some merit to that. We really ought to
take a look at going back to that system. That kind
of thing was real simple. We did some real complex
surgery. We had the Walter Reed Army Institute of
Research which I will hereafter refer to as rare,
hemorrhagic shock research team with us. It was
two doctors, both of them were PhD bioengineers as
well as BMDs, and a nurse, a male nurse, and a couple
of fancy lab tech medic type guys. And patients who
we had been taught in basic were to be treated as
expectant casualties, give them morphine and
bring in the chaplain type things. Those guys
worked on and not, not infrequently actually
packed on aircraft and sent them back home. And it
became the norm in Vietnam surgery that we didn't
really have expectant categories. I mean, unless
a guy was severed into bitsy pieces, if you still
had a heart rate and respiration that could be
supported, then we worked on them. We didn't park
people in the corner, which they had to do in Korea
and Vietnam. I mean, Korea in World War II, a lot.
We did some really kind of heroic stuff. They
brought in big, great fixed-wing aircraft from
Clark Air Force Base and flew burn casualties in
one shot with mid-air refueling all the way to
Brook Army Medical Center in Texas from a war zone.
Of course, we never heard whether these guys lived
or not, but we always assumed that no one would go to
such heroic expense and trouble if there wasn't
some chance. When I got there, the unit was abuzz
with the latest scandal, which was that one of the
operating room nurses was a native of St. Louis.
And she had been very upset because the operating
room did not have a defibrillator. In fact, the
hospital didn't have the defibrillator. And they
had had a guy die on a table that she really felt that
they could have defibbed him. He had come back and
made it. But I remember everybody we were working
on was young, healthy men. I mean, there was
absolutely no excuse to throw in the towel. So she,
railing at the CO, who's just one of the surgeons,
you know, why don't we have a defibrillator, was
told it was not T-O-N-E for a MASH hospital because
we were supposed to be a meatball surgery on the
front lines kind of outfit. She snorted off to her
quarters and sat down and wrote a letter to the CEO
of Anheuser-Busch and told him all about how she
was a... a Budweiser girl from St. Louis who was
stuck out there in the middle of the war zone with no
defibrillator and people were dying, good beer
drinking people were dying of this. And what had
happened was the CEO of Anheuser-Busch picked up
the phone, ordered the fanciest defibrillator
available and put it on a civilian cargo aircraft
to the embassy in Saigon with instructions that it
be delivered to the third surgical hospital. and
then turned around and called his congressman. So
there was a full bore congressional
investigation about why we didn't have
defibrillators. At the same time, we had the only
defibrillator in the country at the time. If I say
kingdom, it's because we spent two years in Saudi
Arabia, too. And
anyway, sure, her name was Mudd. We had more little
inspection tours and stuff coming around, and I
was brand new and couldn't quite figure out why all
these fancy, brassy people. At least, having
grown up with the military, I knew they were fancy.
A lot of my peers didn't even know that. They
thought that was how things always happened. But
anyway, we just did our thing. That day when I woke
up at noon, they told me that I'd be on day shift on
the ward the following day and that I better hurry
up and get dressed because there was a party and off
we lared up to a party and partied until the wee
hours and then went to work in the morning and from
then on out it was six day weeks and usually twelve
hour days although we went through some slow
periods when we backed off to eight hour shifts but
that was the norm. How did you cope with the men on
the ward, the rangers?
I just did what I was supposed to. We have our own
little ritual that we do in medicine and nursing
and how they got that way. A guy can be crushed
because a truck falls on him. It doesn't matter
whether it's a cement truck out at a construction
site or whether it's a military truck in some motor
pool. What we deal with is the crushed chest. And so
we're obsessed with all our little gadgets and
medicines and ventilators and IVs and how much of
this has he had and how much did he put out in eight
hours and all that kind of thing. And that's what we
did. And I don't remember people making a lot of
comments about how we got in the mess. Of course, it
was early on yet. Did you grow attached to any of
your patients? Oh, grossly so. Because it was this
buddy ship thing going on. And I guess maybe the
verb attached makes me nervous. Did I ever
entertain romantic thoughts about them? No. I had
a pretty rousing date life going as it was with
people who were fit and hale and up and around. And
the patients went through fast. We were a surgical
hospital. We evacuated as soon as we stabilized.
So it was very seldom that anybody stayed with us
more than two days. The ones who stayed with us more
than two days were the ones who weren't stable
enough to evacuate. So they were, you know, not
exactly your romantic dreams. But oddly enough,
we would get these guys who stayed who were
unstable. Everybody got obsessed with them. And
it got to where you couldn't have a conversation on
anything else. I had one, Sergeant Pennington,
who changed my life. because I got mad. I had had a
week and a half of Sergeant Pennington. It had
finally rolled around. It was my day off. I didn't
have any place to go. I didn't really have anything
to do. There was a big operation going on. All the
guys were in the field. And, you know, I slept in,
and I went to lunch, and everybody was talking
about Sergeant Pennington's latest. He was a
triple amputee, multiple shrapnel, you know,
200-some debris to shrapnel wounds, you know,
four chest tubes, and he was a mess. And to be
honest, I would be surprised if he lived. We did
evacuate him alive after about two weeks of fairly
intense stuff. But I really would be surprised if
in the long term he lived through the whole thing.
But at any rate, I went out to the bathroom to hold
John. And I mean, they're sitting down. with my
fatigue pants around my ankles, and somebody
comes in, and while I'm doing that, ask me if I've
heard about the latest about Sergeant
Pennington. I just, that was it. I finished what I
was doing, strapped on my pants, shoved my wallet
in my fatigue pants pocket, and I marched down the
road. I'm leaving. I'm not coming back here.
That's all there is to it. And I went stroking off
down the brigade road, and it was a big circle,
cantonment road with units on either side of it,
and on the outside of the outside units, the log
units were on the inside of it and the combat units
were on the outside. And I went down to the brigade
officer's open mess which was the boom room which
was built out of ammo boxes and it was early yet in
the afternoon and there wasn't anybody in there
but the bartender and the club officer who was a
cripple who refused to be evac'd and so they had
found him a light duty job and I demanded a roll of
nickels and a drink and I was provided the same, and
I sat down to play the slot machine. And I don't know
how much time passed, but at some point in time,
this young lieutenant materialized at my elbow
and said, hi, are you a nurse? And I wanted to say, a
really penetrating question, what else will I be
in this outfit? But instead, I looked into those
big, very beautiful blue eyes and said, yes, why?
And it was my sweet Lee, who, poor fella, had been,
he'll tell his own story about how come he was where
he was, but He wasn't out in the shooting having a
good time like everybody else. And he was very
bored. And then the next day, we went to Saigon
shopping. And after that, we were dating on an
almost daily basis. And after about two months of
that, he managed to get himself shot. But he backed
into the third surge and caused quite a bit of
turmoil and amused all the medics, who thought
that was just really cute to have the young lovers
be patient and nurse. Then, and he asked me to marry
him that time, and we piddled around another two
months getting our paperwork approved. It's that
thick, the stack of paperwork we had to have done.
And we got married on the first of January after he
had gotten wounded the second time. And I'd been
down to see the chaplain about arrangements for
the wedding because we decided...
to people let me off this thing out ran the bicycle
back but uh anyway that was the day that four of my
medics came to me and offered to be litter bearers
at my wedding but
uh we got married and we went to Hong Kong for a week
on R&R for our honeymoon and we came back and and uh
An engineer company, as a wedding present, built
us a 12 foot by 24 foot little house in the back of the
hospital. And Lee threw his duffel bag in the
corner, put his steel pot on his head, and went off
to the ward again. And I went back to the ward, and
other than the fact that I wasn't living in the
nurse's shack, my little house was 12 feet behind
the nurse's shack. Everything just went on like
before. My head nurse at the time was a male nurse
major named Kaminsky, a major cam. called me in he
said jerry i would like to lay a proposition in
front of you make sure i'm a married woman now he
said that's the point he said i assume that you
would like to be off whenever lee's in from the
field i said yeah i like that he said i also assume
that now that you're married and won't be partying
like you have been he said i assume that you really
don't care about whether you're off or not while
he's out in the field i said well to some degree he
says about this sport and I will make sure that
you're off duty all the time leaves in from the
field however long it may be as long as you work
every day he's out done at that point in time their
norm had been they would go out on Monday and come
back on Friday so I figured this was kind of like
having every weekend off they stayed gone for 28
days and I worked 12 hour shifts for 28 straight
days before they came back But I got to give Major
Cam credit. The battalion came in about 8.30 in the
morning. At 8.45, he was in his nurse suit. He was
counting the narcotics for me, and he personally
relieved me. And they stayed in for six days. And I
kind of dropped by, and Major Cam said, Let us know
when you're back. And
that was how we ran it for the whole rest of the time I
was there. My dad had gotten orders for Da Nang and
had come over in, I want to say April, May,
something like that. And the Marines were on
13-month tours. The Army was on 12-month tours.
And so Dad was going to go back in, like, June. And I
had got to thinking about this and had decided
that, hey, I didn't want to go back and end up in some
place like Walter Reed. And I really, what with
Basic and Walter Reed, I had 18 months before my
enlistment was up, so... I extended for six
months, and I did that before Matt Lee. I was
already obligated to the extension. And it worked
out fine, because he didn't come in country until
July or something like that. He was pretty close to
my dad's schedule. So I worked out my six-month
extension as a happy young bride, and we left
together. And
then we went back. Now, there's an incredible
amount of, anecdotal kinds of things I can do, but
that's an overview. How did the men treat you, the
corpsmen that you worked with, and in general the
men on the base? Well, it's not possible to talk
about the men monolithically like that. It was an
individual kind of thing. I had grown up in the
Marine Corps. Now, where what counted was what was
on your shoulders. And it hit me very fast in the
Army that this was not necessarily how it was. And
for a woman officer in the Army, it was even worse.
And it chafed me that I had to prove I was who I
appeared to be before I could get the kinds of
behaviors I wanted to have. But my dad had given me
some awfully good advice. He suggested that I
avoid giving direct orders in any way that I could.
and never spare the common courtesies. He says,
honey, if you please and thank you all the time,
people know you have the right to order them to do
things. If you please and thank you, everybody
feels nice, and then when you turn around and snap
an order, watch the dust. And indeed, I only gave an
order once in that assignment, and it was a watch
the dust operation, and it was a guy who needed to be
trached. He had a neck wound, it had swollen up, he
was in rigorous breathing, and It was the middle of
the night and one of the corpsmen noticed funky
noises and went down there and looked at this guy
doing this number and I turned around and just
snarled, get this, get that. Then I ran over and
personally collared the doctor out of bed and
dragged him over in his skivvies. And we tracked
that kid in about 90 seconds from when we
recognized it. And it was funny, because when it
was all over, one of the medics said, gee,
Lieutenant, I never heard you say something like
that before. I thought, Dad was right. And there
were a lot of gals with civilian backgrounds who
really were under the impression that they
weren't supposed to say please and thank you, that
somehow that was unofficially. And yeah, I mean,
what did they know except what they'd seen in
movies? And I found that if you were good at what you
did and you walked in and with minimum of fuss did
it, that it was little to nothing. Now, some of the
younger medics were really susceptible to the
fact that we were American girls over there where
there wasn't much of that. And they would get these
outrageous crushes and sort of droop around
worshiping us from afar. We all collected our
share of that kind of attention, but I think that
was inevitable. Some of the older guys moved into
young uncle and big brother roles just for the
closeness, I really do think. It was something
that they could conscious-wise feel okay about,
but they could be around a feminine presence. I'd
make phone calls on the switch, those dumb field
telephones you have to crank, and get the switch
operator, and he'd say, are you an American girl?
I'd say, no, I'm a lieutenant in the nurse corps.
I'm at the Third Surge Hospital. And he'd say, just
keep talking. Just keep talking. I want to call the
name switch. I'll put you through. Just keep
talking to me while I'm doing it. One thing was for
sure. We never had any trouble hitchhiking. And I
never felt at risk, because I was always in groups.
And I was always treated with utter courtesy I
think that it you know when a truckload of guys
stopped and picked you up when you wanted to
hitchhike over to the PX at the air base well no one
was going to get away with being discourteous to
you without you know five or six others pounds
there wasn't enough of you to go around that's for
sure so nobody was going to get away with it uh I had a
drunk bank a pass at me once on the pass bus and and I
cold cocked him and got threatened with being
charged with striking an enlisted man which i
thought was a little unfair but the person who was
threatening me with that did not follow through
how did you feel about the vietnamese and um our
side their side well let me finish the man issue
okay the thing that wrangled with me is i felt like
the male nurses got all the fun The month before I
arrived, a couple of the more fun-loving nurses
from the hospital in Saigon had been off with some
boyfriends, fellows with wives and children,
back home and feel great pay and a helicopter to
fly. And they had been out joyriding in a
helicopter, and the chopper had crashed. They had
taken it through some high-tension wires, and it
was probably pilot error. At any rate, the
command's response to this was to forbid all
female personnel from flying in rotor-driven
aircraft. except on orders. Well, I just took this
as a tremendous... Because every time they wanted
someone to escort a... You know, we'd have
somebody we had intubated who had to be
hand-bagged down to the neurosurgeon in Saigon or
something, which to me was just, you know, combat
excitement. Oh, boy, medics at their best. I
wanted to do this. And they always let the male
nurses go because then they didn't have to cut
orders. Whereas if they'd have sent one of us,
they'd have had to sit down with a typewriter and
cut orders. Now, I took this as a challenge, and I
managed to explore all the possibilities of
fixed-wing aircraft during my stay to the extent
that I flew out to the field to see my husband in an
L-19, which was not exactly what they had in mind by
making that rule about rotor-driven aircraft.
But you know what an L-19 is? Spot a plane. Yeah. It
was fun. It didn't take much charm to get my
permission to do that, but they had to call the CO of
the 9th Attack Air Force to get permission. Good
thing they didn't ask me whether I had permission,
because I didn't. But I told them where I was going,
they just didn't know what it was. You know, I just
told them the name. They didn't recognize it and
didn't want to show their ignorance by asking me.
It was a new chief nurse who'd only been in the
country two weeks. So, you know, I signed out on the
board and left. It was great. But I finally cracked
the gender barrier in pre-op. After I'd been there
about nine months, the major asked me if I wanted to
transfer to pre-op. And I said, I've wanted to
transfer to pre-op since I got here. That's where
it's at. That's what I want to do. And she said,
well, you know, you'll be the only girl. I said,
it's OK. And so I was the only girl nurse in pre-op
for about six months. And it was funny. The medics
had their poker game going in the back room. When
you're the only nurse on, well, they're, you know.
I mean, the male nurses played poker with them, but
they never even asked me. I had this real complex
Revlon nail care kit that I had treated myself to,
and so when we'd get everything all stocked up and
cleaned up and ready for whatever might come, give
a couple of DPT shots and be ready to settle in for
the rest of the day, I would get this Revlon kit out,
and I would commence to give myself a long and
painstaking manicure. Well, it never failed that
on the second layer of paint tacky,
in would come. And we'd be in the mud and the web gear
and the, you know, all that. And you'd have to strip
it all off and start all over again. About the third
time I did that, the sergeant who was the lead medic
on the shift said, Lieutenant, I'd really
appreciate it if you wouldn't do that when you're
on duty. I said, well, geez, you know, you're
always on duty here. Wouldn't you expect me to do
it? He said, well, look, the guys are kind of
superstitious about it. They have noticed that
every time you're almost done, that your manicure
gets ruined by incoming casualties. And, you
know, we'd really appreciate it if you'd do it on
night shift. So, but other than that, I have to
admit, they again if you could do the job and and
then then acceptance was not a big problem the news
media drove me nuts though oh they'd love to come
out and interview us and they always wanted to ask
you questions like do you feel that you represent
the wives mothers and sweethearts of america
because a man fighting in the war i'd say no i really
don't see i'm a lieutenant in the army And I'm a
nurse, and I've got my own job here, and I do it, and
they're my buddies, and they do their jobs, and I
expect them to shoot people, and I expect to take
care of them when they get shot. And that's how it
is. I'm not representing anybody's anything. I'm
just me. Never did what they taped or shot of me end
up on the air. I was not giving them the answers they
came to get.
What's next, the Vietnamese? How did you feel
about the Vietnamese? Well, I came from a family
environment where bigotry wasn't supported. The
Marine Corps integrated its schools when I was a
youngster, even though the schools off post
weren't. And I grew up with blacks and Koreans and
Germans and all the foreign wives. A lot of my
friends had foreign mothers who were naturalized
Americans by that time. and my mother and father
just had never any patience with anybody putting
anybody down it's funny in retrospect I realize
that the family does have one very bad failing is
their intellectual snobs didn't have much much
patience with dumb people but as long as you could
hold your own right wise it didn't matter what
color or shade or religion you were so with that as
my background I had uh and I always liked languages
and I've been interested in other countries
cultures not going near the foreign service
school thing So I had already read all the little
books they had out about what's going on in
Vietnam. And I had made a stab at learning the
language, which was difficult. The language is so
regional that you go 50 kilometers and they can't
understand you. The accents are so heavy. Even
words are different. And a lot of people didn't
really realize that. And it's like some of those
places in Africa where one country with 80
dialects. There's over 200 dialects in India,
although it's a fairly large country, but still
200 languages. So I kind of peeled off. Now, I spoke
French at that point in time. I'd had four years in
high school. And most of the Vietnamese who were
over 35 who were educated spoke French. So I was
able to deal with folk in the market and that kind of
thing in French instead of in English. But I didn't
ever know any Vietnamese people. I mean, even the
ones that were employed in our compound. I mean,
the truck came up, they got off, they went to their
jobs, and they worked. And it was, good morning,
how are you? Did I say that right? Teach me the word
for. But I didn't even know whether some of these
women were married or not or whether they had
children or not. To be quite honest, I wasn't
interested.